so hi how are you guys doing my name is
Callie and if any of you in the room
know me you probably know me by the name
of swoon which is a tag name that I
adopted I guess over 10 years ago when I
started doing wheat paste out on the
street illegally and tag names seemed
like a good idea and then it just kind
of stuck with me I to be honest in
person I hate to be called it highway to
recoat Callie and I just realized
recently that I think it's because swoon
for me is kind of an idea that has been
generating envy for a lot of years and I
think the thing that I would like to try
and do today is explain that
so I'll start from the beginning I went
to school here at Pratt I studied
painting I was from a very small town
hello and and when I got here you know I
was really ready to kind of grow into
this life as an artist but very very
quickly I started to feel really
suffocated by what seems to me this sort
of life that was laid out for me and
like I was gonna paint some pictures
they were gonna end up on a wall you
know maybe that wall was in a gallery
maybe was gonna be in a museum but it
seemed like this kind of very
straightforward thing were the only
people they were ever necessarily gonna
appreciate what I was gonna do would be
the kind of people who are very
comfortable going into galleries or who
had that not enough money and sort of
spare time to go to museums and so you
know I was really really really hungry
for context I wanted to become part of
something larger than myself I wanted to
embrace the world and become a part of
the world and like looking back on it I
think that my response to that desire
was like quite literal like I I
basically started making drawings
instead of gluing them to the world two
walls and things so I I had a series of
drawings that I started their portraits
of people in City and then sort of
looking at architecture and looking at
the way that people interact with cities
and stuff
and I thought that that project was
gonna go on for something like two
months but I'm still doing it like over
ten years later so it was something that
really started me on a path and I think
that the first thing they really
happened was like you know I was a young
woman and I really had no sense of my
ability to make any kind of change in
the world
and then suddenly in this very concrete
way I went outside I put up a wheat
paste I walked by the next day and there
it was and I had changed that street
corner and so just that very very small
thing of like okay it was a gray wall on
the side of an abandoned bodega and now
it's a gray wall the picture on it and
it's you know people can have a moment
of connection with that and it's this
very very tiny change but nonetheless
for me to be able to see and read back
that I could have an impact on things
was was really really transformative and
I would say that it led me on a pretty
long path that I'm still on and the
other thing that was really great about
working in that way was that I was
having hundreds of different
interactions and that was sort of what I
was talking about about wanting context
then once I started working in the city
I started to get all this different kind
of feedback from the pieces that I was
making and one of those one of those
stories that has stuck with me for years
and it happened years ago but it has
remained really important to me happened
this time that I was walking down a
block pretty near to my house and I had
been making these kind of tiny little
views and then drilling tiny little
holes and construction fences and and
putting them in there and and so I was
like peeking at one of them to see like
how is it holding up when this woman
stopped me and she was like hey do you
know anything about that and I was like
well yeah I made that and she said oh
cool I want to tell you this story she
said you know there's a guy who lives on
this block he's a little bit mentally
handicapped and he hangs out here it's
kind of his block like he's the greeter
he talks to everyone and she said that
he found that and that kind of very
quickly became his thing and he started
to call it the secret and she said and
every time somebody would come by he'd
be like hey do you want to see the
secret and he would bring them over and
show them this and she said that it kind
of created this like slightly magical
space between her and the neighbors on
the block that they all kind of shared
this secret and I like just hugged the
stranger I was like oh my god thank you
for telling me that you know it was
really it was an amazing thing to me
that that that feeling that by putting a
little kind of very tiny change in an
environment you can change all those
associations that people have and sort
of create an opportunity for connection
among people and also you know what-what
the guy I forgot his name story right
before I was saying about the genesis of
possible worlds I thought that was a
really nice phrase and when when I think
about that and when I think about you
know you make a small change and that
creates the feeling that maybe
like a slightly different world kind of
existing like right where we are and you
just have to have a little bit of a
perceptual shift in order to see it that
was like kind of what I the hope that I
took away from that story and I would
say that that kind of desire that kind
of impulse was was sort of born in the
next project that I was to sort of
dedicate my life to which was a series
of rafts but I spent about four years
making this one is called the Miss
Rockaway Armada and it was we were a
collective of about 30 people and we
built these rafts when we went down the
Mississippi River and then this one is
the swimming cities of Switchback sea
which was a series of flotilla that I
designed that came down the Hudson River
Church New York City sort of performing
along the way and then the swimming
cities of Serenissima that next one with
which we actually were able to traverse
the Adriatic Sea terrifyingly enough and
and arrived in Venice which was
incredibly magical and the really cool
thing about arriving on a rig like this
is people freaked out
like what are you I used to love being
like a boat but anyway I just I found
like through years of working in this
way that like if you can make something
that people are not expecting to see and
if you can roll up with it in a place
that people are not expecting to find it
in a way that just totally blows
people's expectations you think this
little opening happens you know in that
moment of surprise and in that little
kind of moment of cognitive dissonance
you're able to actually get a reaction
from people which is much different than
any other response I've ever had to a
work that I created it's almost like you
create a little opening into this
childlike part of themselves you know
it's like that part that's usually kind
of grounds down by the relentless
grueling details of every day and it's
and if you can kind of break that open
then there's suddenly this feeling of a
lot more possibility and that the world
is kind of like stranger and a little
bit more there's just a lot more going
on than maybe you imagined five minutes
ago
and you know for me I think about that a
lot and I feel like that kind of a space
like the place where you believe in kind
of an infinity of possibilities is the
place within ourselves with which we are
able to make positive change like that's
kind of like that for me is what gives
me that kind of strength and and I feel
like that's the kind of place that from
which you're able to you know even
though we've seen like the thousandth
brutal kind of ending you're able to
still say no I don't accept this as an
inevitable outcome I'm gonna reimagine
and regroup and try to try to make a new
a new situation and in a new path
through these situations and so and so
for me I felt like you know being on
these boats for years and constantly
being in contact with that sense of
wonder from people it really like
strengthened my feeling of like a lot of
possibility thank you of like just
having a sense of kind of of heightened
possibilities and I think that it also
really strengthened my own ability to
kind of act from that place you know to
sort of divide out and believe in sort
of unimaginable things
and let me see what's next so I think
that you know after all those years of
working in that way I was kind of ready
to not be working on on the water
anymore but I wasn't really sure what
was next and I definitely had that kind
of sense of possibility kind of around
me and I was in the woods and kind of a
hold up self-study architecture class
with my boyfriend and fellow artist Ben
wolf and we heard the news of the
earthquake in Haiti and I think that you
know like everyone else we were totally
totally shaken by that news and we
immediately started to ask ourselves
what can we do to help and you know it
was pretty apparent that we weren't
going to be first responders we're not
translators we're not medics and and of
course you know there was a little bit
of that question of like weird artists
like what can we do is there anything
that we can do does it even make any
sense you know and so we started sort of
researching and thinking about what were
some of the responses that other
architects artists activists community
organizers had had a disaster and we
found the work of an iranian-born
architect named Anarkali Lee and he's
somebody that had spent the last 20
years of his life he started an
organization called Cal Earth and he
dedicated himself to the problem of the
humanitarian housing or of the housing
crisis kind of worldwide and what he
spent his life trying to do was to
develop a system which was easily
replicatable and which could make houses
that were extremely resistant to
earthquakes and tornadoes and which were
built relatively cheaply with the
materials that people had on hand and so
we talked about it a bit and we decided
that sort of combining this sound and
proven kind of architectural system with
our own you know ingenuity and
creativity and also trying to sort of
draw upon and think about the strength
of our creative community actually
Cristina Rea who's here right now she
she helped us do fundraisers and so it
was it was this thing of saying who are
we as artists and what is the thing that
we can bring to this situation and I
walked and we wanted to really pull
together a very specific response that
was about the strength of our community
and so we decided to you know take this
idea and to to see if there was a place
in Haiti that this would make sense and
so we traveled to a village we traveled
around a little bit sort of looking for
the place
this would work and making sure that
this architectural style would make
sense in Haiti and we found a village
called begonias which is outside of
Logan and it's a village of farmers and
mango growers and stone carvers and they
were really excited to work with us and
the we so we learned this architectural
style and then we shared it and we built
a community center over the period of
six weeks and we engaged a lot of
artisans and local craftspeople Andrew
and I actually just recently got the
really awesome news that through a
creative time we just received a
Rockefeller Foundation grant to go back
in December and yes this woman her name
is Monique and she came to us on hiring
day and she said I'm pregnant
and I don't have anyone to take care of
me and I can't really do any heavy
lifting but if you could hire me that
would be great
so we had her help us serve lunch and
then she had her baby in the middle of
the project and so now my hope is that
when we go back in December we can build
her a house and that's really exciting
and it's very different than anything
I've ever been able to do before and I
guess you know the thing I started
saying was that you know me like ten
years ago in Brooklyn putting up an
illegal wheat paste really did sort of
lead me on this path which is which
ended or that ended which is continuing
here with this kinds of projects and
hating these kinds of much more unlikely
projects and and it's I feel like that
all of the experiences that I have had
over this you know over the years and
all of the sort of improbability that
that has that has that has come to come
to be has really just really sort of
gave me a certain kind of a faith that
you could make them likely things happen
because when we started to think about
this project a lot of people said like
you're just a couple of artists like
what are you thinking you know you're
not a big NGO you're not experienced in
dealing with disaster you know why don't
you leave it to the big groups like
they're having a hard time as it is and
I just really had the gut feeling that
what we had which was being a very small
and focused group that wanted to on a
very person to person scale sort of lend
our energy and our help could be kind of
our unique strengths in it and it
and so I guess I just want to sort of
bring it back around to what I started
to say about explaining the my name my
quote-unquote name which is swoon this
kind of I think that for me it has it's
become not quite a name but more like a
code word for the kind of like the
tricksters belief in miracles which is
to say that like if you kind of break a
rule over here and move a boundary over
there and have like a moment of creative
play and create something of beauty that
through all of those actions and
combined with a lot of dedication you
can start to create little cracks in the
kind of facade of impossibility and
inevitability that I think overlays a
lot of our lives and that a lot of us
battle and that you know through those
cracks little kinds of possibilities
start to come up and they ask to be born
and then they're born and then they
start sort of unifying and linking with
each other and that's a really powerful
force and and that's the force that I
would say I live my life by so thanks
for letting share
[Applause]